+++
title = "Browser test code for JSers"
date = "2017-04-10T09:42:10+09:00"

+++

Browsers are sophisticated software with all kinds of technology stacks packed into a single, giant application. Browsers not only provide graphical user interface for static documents, but also function as dynamic web applications users can interact with. However, they can sometimes have suspicious behaviors for web developers like me. HTML standards are designed and developed by mainly two organizations, W3C and WHATWG, resulting in subtle differences in the details of the specs, therefore it's pretty natural for browser implementations having inconsistent behavior among them. JavaScript itself is evolving to the next level as a programming language with ECMAScript6 and other coming versions of it, yet a lot of production-running code is written in ES5 or older, and continues to have unfavorable parts of the language such as non-intuitive, implicit type casting and many others.

I recently encountered a bug on the web application I have been working on, which I noticed through a JavaScript exception from the client browser. JavaScript errors are really tricky since they provide very little information about the error/exception. Especially, when the exception had been triggered on a third-party script, more precisely, a JavaScript file hosted on a different origin than the HTML document, all exceptions become `ScriptError` with no stack trace nor exception line/column number information. If the exception occurred by a script of an external services you're using, like analytics tracking tools, chat widget or whatever, you might want to blame the error on them, however, the outcome of the exception can still be critical for your user causing undesirable behavior on the page/application.

With the little information I was given from the exception, I was unable to reproduce the error or even understand what was happening from the error message. Luckily, in prior to this incident, I started to read WebKit's source code partly just for fun partly to understand more about how browsers worked. I figured it would be impossible to go through the vast amount of C++ source code and find out the cause of the exception, but I casually did a grep to the whole WebKit source code searching the exception message, and surprisingly found it in one of the files under `LayoutTests`.

`LayoutTest` directory in the WebKit repository contains loads of HTML & JavaScript tests, as one might suppose written in plain HTML & JavaScript. The good thing about these tests is that you can just open them in your browser and see the test results in your own environment with zero setup. It's mostly pure HTML and JavaScript with no framework, libraries or transpires being used; you just take a look at those files and you'll have a better understanding of how each browser API behave. The file I had discovered from the grep was a test suite for CSP related features and behaviors, which gave me a huge clue of what was happening with the error and made it possible for me to investigate deeper in that direction.

This is when I realized how helpful it was to go through these browser test, which allows you to have much better understanding of even the simplest API like `document.contains` that you might already be familiar with. Yes, there are plenty of useful documentation of browser APIs how to use them, you can even go peek the HTML specs, but one thing you should remember is that there are a lot of undocumented stuff when it comes to browser implementations cause it's really up to the vendors. MDN is a very good source, yet does not contain everything. Looking at the test files for a browser, written by the people actually implemented, lets you have actual sense of how it works aside from how it's written in the specs. The test files under `LayoutTests` are written in simple HTML and vanilla JavaScript, so it doesn't require any knowledge of C++ and how it's actually being implemented.

There are are thousands of test files under `LayoutTests` so it'll certainly be a long journey to go through all of them, but here I'd like to show you some of the ones that I've found quite interesting.

### 1. array-nested-loop.html

This is a test file that checks how much computation time it takes when you try to do a nested loop iteration using two-dimensional arrays. The below is an extraction from the source file just to showcase you the core of the test. You cans see the whole file from [here](https://github.com/WebKit/webkit/blob/master/LayoutTests/perf/array-nested-loop.html).

```javascript
function setupFunction(magnitude)
{
    array = [];
    for (var i = 0; i < magnitude; i++) {
        array[i] = i;
    }
}
function test(magnitude)
{
    for (var i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        for (var j = 0; j < array.length; j++) {
            var foo = array[i] + array[j];
        }
    }
}
Magnitude.description("Tests that doing a nested loop over an array is quadratic.");
Magnitude.run(setupFunction, test, Magnitude.POLYNOMIAL);
```

The expected behavior of this test that the total calculation time increases by two to the power of given number of iterations. Note the `magnitude` variable and the class; this is a test helper that measures the calculation performance used across WebKit's performance tests. If the given number is 10, you get an array containing 1024 arrays in it.

The below is the result of doing this test up to two to the power of 12, which is represented as `magnitude` in the below chart. The `iterations` column shows how much iterations it was possible to perform while performing the given test function the array. In short, the more `iterations` are, the better the performance is.

```
magnitudes: 2,4,8,16,32,64,128,256,512,1024,2048,4096
iterations: 112352,52595,118454,75968,27994,7327,2277,699,186,47,12,4
```

You can see that the results fluctuate between magnitude of 2 to 16, but after 32 the iteration counts are dropping by more than 4 times fewer than the previous result. This is pretty intuitive when you look at the program itself, but it still is something you should be aware of when looking for performance issues. Also, I found this result a bit surprising concerning the fact that these small calculations must have been compiled and executed on the JIT compiler after certain numbers of iterations, yet resulting in polynomial increase. Or maybe that is the reason the result gets settled after certain magnitude.

### 2. document-contains.html

[This test](https://github.com/WebKit/webkit/blob/master/LayoutTests/perf/document-contains.html) asserts that, unlike the nested loop as above, `document.contains` will always have the same calculation time regardless to how many nodes it has inside `document`. The test first creates a lot of `<div>` elements in the `document` while performing `document.contains` during every loop. You might think that as the number of DOM nodes grow the DOM lookup time of `document.contains` increases, but the results show that this is not the case.

```
magnitudes: 2,4,8,16,32,64,128,256,512,1024,2048,4096
iterations: 70107,59787,95958,129782,128047,130236,140427,122163,115772,130717,117249,138466
```

This doesn't mean you can abuse `document.contains`, but it is definitely something that I would have never discovered by looking at MDN's [documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/API/Node/contains).

### 3. autocomplete-cleared-on-back.html

The last one I'm introducing in this post is the behavior of `autocomplete` on input elements. This feature can be handy for login forms, but due to security restrictions they have some behaviors that you should know about before using.

In [this test file](https://github.com/WebKit/webkit/blob/master/LayoutTests/security/autocomplete-cleared-on-back.html) it's got an HTML input tag with `autocomplete` attribute set to it, and using JavaScript it fills the input and then goes to a different page from there. When you hit the "back" button of the browser, the input value that the JavaScript previously set is gone, since keeping it could expose vulnerabilities it there is a malicious script injected in the page.

## Conclusion

I just picked up a few examples from the sea of test files under `LayoutTests`, but these can be really helpful to guide you how browsers and its APIs really work. When you encounter something suspicious how browsers behave or failed to find documentations about a browser API, try checking out these tests.
