+++
date = "2018-06-24T19:28:57+09:00"
title = "Safari's ITP and GDPR"

+++

Almost a yaer ago, Apple's Safari had introduced a new security feature called [Intelligent Tracking Prevention](https://webkit.org/blog/7675/intelligent-tracking-prevention/), commonly known as ITP, which created a huge impact in fields that heavily relied on third party cookies, most drastically to ad network companies. Since its birth ITP has evolved to be more strict about protecting user privacy, disallowing third party cookie access without the consent of the user.

Aside from what's happening in the web and browser world, [General Data Protection Regulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation) has come to force on May 27th 2018 which also affected a lot of online business that made use of data of users within the European Economic Area. A lot of website nowadays show a popup asking whether the user grants permission for the website to collect data via HTTP cookie, in other words, identify the user and personalize the website in most cases, to accommodate GDPR.

Although these two policies are governed by totally different organizations with totally different rationales, they're both unarguably leading the future of the web to a more strict and secure place. It occurs to me that Safari's ITP might be Apple's strategic way of adapting to GDPR, which might not necessarily be for Apple's own benefit but more for the good of the web. Of course, ITP and GDPR don't have direct connection with each other, but I think it's a pretty cool move for Apple if this was the case. I wonder if other browser vendors will follow this sort of global trend in such way or come up with a different solution, or perhaps just leave it to the service providers as they always had.
